<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<HTML>
<HEAD><META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=utf-8" /></HEAD><BODY style="direction: ltr; unicode-bidi: bidi-override">
Moo News<br/>The newsletter of Great Brook Farm State Park<br/>SUMMER &amp; FALL 2002<br/><b><br/></b><b> Ray Faucher, Park Supervisor, Dennis Marchand, Park Maintenance<br/></b><b> Rebecca Markey, Park Interpreter Melissa Marteney, Park Maintenance <br/></b><b>   </b><br/><br/><br/><u><br/></u><u></u><b><u>Whats Happening?</b><br/></u>CHANGES AT GBFM<br/><br/>Great Brook Farm State Park is slated for some major changes! If you havent been by the park lately, come and have a look. Large land excavating machinery has spotted the landscape just behind the main parking lot in preparation for a million-dollar project! Con-struction is expected to last four to six months where a visitors center, pavilion, and indoor restrooms will be located. Picnic tables will provide shade relief under the pavilion and overlook a butterfly garden to be dedicated to Mrs. Susan Smith, prior owner of Great Brook Farm. The erosion in the current parking area will be transformed into stone-walled terraces giving the visitor a birds eye view of the duck pond and hundreds of landscaping flowers and trees designed to bring birds, butterflies and our guests pleasure. The pond area will have a meadow appearance and the parking lot will be pushed further back into the cornfield to be nearly invisible from the pondmerely fading into the horizon. A walk will be constructed swinging from the parking lot around the visitors center, through the current animal pens up to the ice-cream stand, providing easy access for wheelchairs and strollers. Of course the park will be still be running scheduled tours, the ice cream stand will continuing serving their delicious frozen treats, and the spotted ladies we call Holsteins will keep right on producing milk as usualeven through all the construction. We hope youre as excited about this change as much as we are! Come check it out!<br/><br/><br/>       GREAT BROOK FARM (978) 371-7083<br/><br/>Several buildings and acres of pasture are leased and operated by Mark and Tamma Duffy as a working dairy farm. The sight and smell of farm animals are both reminders of Great Brook Farms agricultural heritage as well as an educational tool used for visitors to experience the workings of a modern farm. Nearly 8,000 guests annually tour our barns alone.<br/><br/>Recipient of the Carlisle Conservationist Award, as well as The Green Pastures Award in Massachusetts for an Outstanding Dairy Farm, Mark Duffy continues to retain excellence in dairy farming within the once dominated farming community of Carlisle. <br/><br/><i>Great Brook Farm State Park still requests any guests visiting from Europe or those who have visited European farms within the past 2 weeks refrain from entering the barnyard or milking barn. We appreciate your patience while Foot &amp; Mouth disease is finally coming under control in Europe but still not introduced into the United States.<br/></i><br/>Fall marks the harvest of 105 acres of field cow corn in September and cranberry harvest on or about October 15 with the sale of fresh cranberries! (Within the first three weeks of October)  Everyone is welcome to view this colorful event. The cranberry bogs are located on Curve Street, about l mile down on the right side coming from Lowell Street. <b>Please note</b>: <i>Due to</i> <i>the</i> <i>shortening of the park interpreters season, there will be no public cranberry bog tours available this year, unless otherwise posted or advertised. </i><br/><u>farm stand news<br/></u><br/>The ice-cream stand is open early April from 11 AM to dusk through October, selling 68 flavors of ice-cream; also including sorbet, sherbet and frozen yogurt.. The stand also sells drinks, chips, grilled hot-dogs, delicious corn on the cob in season, and a Cow-Moobilia Gift Shop! Bovine compost is available at $3.50 per 60/lb bag, or 3 bags for $10. You can also view our Bee Observation Hive and purchase cranberry honey harvested straight from the Carlisle Cranberry Bog. Come enjoy some sweet ice cream or treats on the farm!<br/><br/><br/><u></u><i><u></u></i><b><i><u>    Park Supervisor wants you to know:<br/></u></i></b><br/>Thus far, this year has brought us some positive and negative aspects. First the positives. The site work and the new building have broken ground! On Friday June 7th we had our official "ground breaking" ceremony. Present were Representative Carol Cleven, Commissioner Peter Webber, and Carlisle Selectman, John Balintine, along with several other interested parties. We also had 4th graders from St Leo's School in Leominster representing our school groups. The actual construction began on June 10th and has progressed quickly with completion projected for September. <br/>  The negative aspect for this year has been the late start of our seasonal staff. Both Rebecca and Melissa didn't start until May 18th. Rebecca's delayed start has had a powerful negative impact on our school groups. Because they were unable to schedule a program early in the season, many schools didn't have time to book and arrange for the necessary bussing in time before school ended. Unfortunately, many early groups were turned away. Early lay-offs will also affect the schools again in the autumn! Melissa was thrust headfirst into our maintenance schedule; and with all the rain, has barely had a chance to catch her breath!  <br/>So here we are, set in the middle of what life provides some ups, some downs, yet we still move on. Next year will bring a whole new set of issues and challenges when we open our new building and start our interpretive programs. Who knows, we might even have all the staff we need to operate this facility in a way <i>that we all would like</i>! You never know what tomorrow will bring<br/>Do you know what you can do at<br/>Great Brook Farm State Park?<br/><br/>&#61656; Get a public Barn Tour on Saturdays &amp; Sundays at 1, 2, and 3 PM<br/><br/>&#61656; Get a Milking Tour on Sundays at 6:15 PM (May 26-August 25)<br/>&#61656; Schedule a guided trail walk on local flora, fauna, or park history. <br/>&#61656; Hike 20+ miles of trails.<br/>&#61656; Ski or Snowshoe trails in season. (mid Nov.-mid March. Fee for groomed trails) <br/>&#61656; Horse or mountain bike. (Please, no motorized vehicles!)<br/>&#61656; Walk your dog! (Please observe leash notices on the main farm and pick up mutt mits available at the entrance of the park or at the Hart (ski) barn.)<br/>&#61656; Bring and launch your canoe or kayak to view wildlife on Meadow Pond.<br/>&#61656; Bring a picnic lunch and eat by the pond or in the meadow.<br/>&#61656; Fish (with fresh water license)<br/>&#61656; Reserve the Hart Barn area for a family or small group picnic.<br/>&#61656; Schedule a Barn Tour and/or Nature Walk for your Scout or School group.<br/>&#61656; Sign up for the Jr. Ranger Program (offered during August).<br/>&#61656; Take a hayride around the Lantern Loop on specified weekends through October. ($2 charge under 3free)<br/>&#61656; Watch busy bees creating honey on display at the ice cream stand or eat an ice-cream sundae!<br/><b>ALL STATE PROGRAMS OFFERED FREE OF CHARGE.<br/></b>      DOG WALKING AT GREAT BROOK FARM  <br/><br/> Great Brook Farm State Park has been a favorite location for dog walkers for many years. In fact, Great Brook is one of the few state parks that still allows dogs off-leash. It is not a surprise, then, that the park's popularity with dog walkers has increased in recent years. After talking to many patrons who walk their dogs off-leash, the Park has decided to educate<i> all </i>dog walkers and give them a chance to correct the situation of aggressive or threatening dog behavior. <b><i>Without corrective measures, all dogs in the future may need restraint with a collar and leash at all times.</i></b><br/><br/>Aggressive or threatening behavior <i>must</i> be prevented. Even an aggressive 'display' without injury can be very upsetting to other park patrons. Sooooo, what can you do?<br/><br/>&#61656; No matter how friendly you think your dog is you cannot allow it to rush up to other people or dogs (especially dogs that are on-leash). This behavior is rude and can be frightening as well as dangerous.<br/><br/>&#61656; Control your dog and ask other patrons before you allow your dog to approach. <br/><br/>&#61656; You are required <i>by law</i> to pick up after your dog. Mutt mitt bags are available at the entrances to the pond and Hart Barn parking areas.<br/><br/>&#61656; State Regulation 304 CMR 12.08 (3) requires: A person shall keep any animal under his or her control from interfering with any other park patron's enjoyment of Department property. This means <u>that </u><b><u></u><i><u>if you do not have verbal control of your dog, your dog MUST be on-leash at all times</i></b></u><b><i>.</i></b><br/><br/>&#61656; Currently the only areas that require dogs to be leashed are the parking lots and near the farm animals and ice cream stand. Respect those requirements, please. <br/><br/>&#61656; Call your dog calmly to you, secure him/her, and step to the side of the trail when other walkers, joggers, leashed dogs, riders, or bicyclists are trying to pass.<br/><br/>&#61656; Avoid congregating at the main pond. The path there is narrow and not everyone enjoys wet and muddy dogs when they are trying to pass through that area.<br/><br/>&#61656; Take advantage of early mornings, late afternoons, and weekdays to walk your dog. There is less park traffic at these times and less chance of drawing complaints.  <br/><br/><b>There must be a reduction of the number of dog-related complaints over the coming<br/></b><b>year in order to save the off-leash privileges at Great Brook Farm State Park!</b><br/><b><br/></b><b>*</b>Remember all dogs <b>must</b> display collars with up-to-date licenses and rabies tagsthis is the law!<br/><br/>                  Credit given to TrailBerners &amp; Friends brochure. For more information go to: groups.yahoo.com/group/TrailBerners <br/><br/><br/><b>COW CHIPS<br/></b>This edition continues a new column on frequently asked questions about cows, and general information. We hope you will find this an entertaining, as well as an informative section for your enjoyment! <br/><br/><i>Did you know?<br/></i>In ancient Ireland, wealth was referred to neither in terms of money nor ownership of land; instead, the cow was the measure of everything, including the unit of value.  Egyptian clay tablets dating over 4,000 years ago refer to cheese used as a tax imposed on conquered tribes. The Latin word for money is pecunia. Pecuniary and impecunius are derived from the root pecunia. The word <i>fee</i> also comes from the old word pecus, meaning cattle. The image of a bull was stamped onto Roman coins.               Credit- <i>The Complete Cow</i>- by Sarah Rath<br/><br/>GARDENING FOR BUTTERFLIES<br/><br/><br/>Butterfly gardening is easy and rewarding. Since a butterfly garden is slated under the construction of the new Visitor's Center, we thought some information concerning attracting and housing butterflies might be a 'colorful' addition.<br/>"To attract butterflies to your garden, you must first provide the nectar plants that nourish adult butterflies. Once the butterflies have found your garden, they are likely to stay and reproduce, if their other basic needs of water, sun, shelter, and reproductive areas can also be met. A variety of food plants will give the greatest diversity of visitors. Try staggering wild and cultivated plants, as well as blooming times of the day and year. Groups of the same plants will be easier for butterflies to see than singly planted flowers. Butterflies can't hover very long and need a place to land. They prefer composites (daisy-like flowers), panicles (large clusters of blooms on a stem), and umbels (flat topped flowers that originate from a single apex). These plants provide a landing pad for the butterflies and easy access to the nectar. When given the choice, butterflies prefer to visit stands of flowers with strong colors such as orange, yellow, and purple. Flowers with the heaviest perfume are most appealing to the butterflies sensitive sense of smell. Highly hybridized and double flowers do not usually provide a good source of nectar. Having attracted adult butterflies to your garden, you can prolong their stay by encouraging them to mate and lay eggs. The larva and adult stages of butterflies will require different food sources. Providing the right host plant in your garden is the most important step in creating a butterfly garden. It is important to plant a large number of host plants in order to provide adequate food for the caterpillars. They will perish if there is not enough available. In addition to food, the host plants provide shelter for all stages of the butterfly's life cycle. Like all living creatures, butterflies require water. Place small stones in birdbaths to give them a place to land and sip water. Some species prefer mud puddles. Overripe fruit, allowed to sit for a few days is also very attractive! Butterflies will readily bask in the sun when it is warm out, but few are seen on cloudy days. Provide shelter to protect from extreme temperatures. Also provide nooks and crannies for over-wintering caterpillars or adults."  Credit given to: Massachusetts<u> Agriculture in the Classroom</u>, Spring 2002 edition<br/><br/><br/><br/><b>Weekend Barn Tours</b> <br/><u>See the Cows Milked on the Milking Tour<br/></u>           6:15 PM at the Ice Cream Stand<br/>             <i></i><b><i>Sundays only</i></b> through August 25th, 2002<br/>    <br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><b>**UPCOMING EVENTS!  WATCH YOUR LOCAL PAPERS!!*</b><br/><b>Junior Ranger Program</b>, Great Brook Farm State Park, Thursdays in August, call (978) 369-6312<br/><b>Massachusetts Archaeology Week,</b> September 29-October 5th<br/><b>Butterfly Garden dedication, Anticipated in Spring 2003<br/></b><br/><br/><br/>Great Brook Farm State Park<br/>P.O.Box 829<br/>Carlisle, MA 01741<br/>978-369-6312<br/><br/></BODY>
</HTML>
