<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<HTML>
<b><i><BODY>
Dinoseb</i><p>
</b><p>
<p>
<p>
<i><b>August 2005</b></i><p>
<b><i>Fact Sheet</i><p>
</b><p>
<i><b>Division of Environmental Health </b></i><p>
<i><b>Office of Environmental Health &amp; Safety</b></i><p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<i><b>Dinoseb is an herbicide that was used until 1986. The federal Environ-mental Protection Agency (EPA) canceled its use because animal testing indicated there was a possibility of birth defects and other adverse health effects among people who applied it or who had substantial exposure.</b></i><p>
<p>
<p>
<b><i>Can I tell if there is dinoseb in my water?</i><p>
</b><p>
<i><b>Water may be yellow if contaminated with more than 0.1 mg/L (100 parts per billion) of dinoseb.  This is much higher than the </b></i><p>
<i><b>0.007 mg/L that is considered a safe level for everyday consumption, so a laboratory test is required to determine if the water is safe to drink.</b></i><p>
<p>
<p>
<b><i>Basic toxicology of dinoseb</i><p>
</b><p>
<i><b>Pure dinoseb is considered highly toxic to mammals and is lethal when fed to rodents at high levels.  Poisoning and death have occurred in humans after intentional ingestions of concentrated dinoseb and after heavy skin contamination by agricultural sprays.</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Dinoseb can be absorbed by skin contact, inhalation, or ingestion.  Bathing in or drinking contaminated water can lead to absorption.  Once in the body, it can distribute widely and cross the placental membrane.  It is metabolized by the liver and excreted in the feces and, to a lesser extent, in the urine.  Elimination of dinoseb from the human body is gradual.  Dinoseb can build up in blood and tissues if daily exposures exceed the amount eliminated daily.</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>A compound very similar to dinoseb was used as a therapy for weight loss in the 1930s.  It is estimated that 100,000 people in the United States used this drug while it was available as a therapeutic agent.  Daily oral doses of 1-5 mg/kg-body weight were common.  Side effects reported by some users included fever and sweating, various skin rashes, indications of liver injury, and cataracts.  The drug was canceled because of these side effects.</b></i><p>
<p>
<p>
<b><p>
</b><i><b>What are the health effects?</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Early warning signs of dinoseb exposure are sweating, fever, malaise, and headache.  Dinoseb intoxication may also cause thirst, insomnia, nausea, weight loss, and mood changes. Warm flushed skin, rapid heart rate, quick shallow breathing, and convulsions are signs of serious life-threatening poisoning.  A small percentage of people exposed to dinoseb have complained of skin rashes, but the rashes have not been directly linked to the amount of exposure.  Skin contact may cause yellow staining or inflammation of the skin.</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Repeated exposure for long periods of time can lead to liver and kidney problems.  It may also cause decreased fertility in adults, birth defects, and developmental changes in a growing fetus. These effects led to the cancellation of this product by EPA since the effects were observed in animals at levels which might be encountered in places where people work.</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Dinoseb is not listed as a human cancer-causing agent by EPA.  It is classified as a group D compound (“not classifiable”) because the cancer tests, although negative, are not considered adequate by today’s standards.</b></i><p>
<p>
<b><i>Medical management</i><p>
</b><p>
<i><b>For advice on medical management of patients, call the Washington Poison Center at 1-800-732-6985 or the physician consult line at the National Pesticide Telecommunication Network in Corvallis, Oregon at 1-800-858-7378.  EPA’s “Recognition and Management of Pesticide Poisoning, 5th ed.” Donald P. Morgan editor, 1999 is also helpful and is available free online at:  </b></i><i><b></b></i><p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
 <i><b>Need More Information?</b></i><p>
 <i><b>Please contact:</b></i><p>
? <i><b>Your county health department.  Find your county health department on the Web at :<br>
</b></i><i><b></b></i><p>
<p>
? <i><b>Additional copies of this fact sheet can be obtained from:</b></i><p>
<i><b>Office of Environmental Health &amp; Safety<br>
P O Box 47825<br>
Olympia, WA  98504-7825<br>
Toll-free:  1-888-586-9427</b></i> <br>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
</BODY>
</HTML>
