<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<HTML>
<BODY>
 ? <i><b>Page 1</b></i><p>
<p>
1<p>
<i><b>1710 Murray Ave, Suite 300</b></i><p>
<i><b>Pittsburgh, PA 15217</b></i><p>
<i><b>Tel: 412-422-2499</b></i><p>
<i><b>Fax: 412-422-2495</b></i> <i><b>Vivísimo, Inc.</b></i> <br>
<i><b>Memo</b></i><p>
<i><b></b></i><i><b> Office</b></i><p>
<i><b></b></i><i><b> Patricia Pesenti</b></i><p>
<i><b></b></i><i><b> Denny Brestensky</b></i><p>
<i><b></b></i><i><b> Wednesday, February 06, 2008</b></i><p>
<i><b></b></i><i><b> Door system</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Good Afternoon,</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>We have a new door system which works with a swipe card. I will hand them out and ask that you please hand in your keys. The swipe card will open our main door, back door and the doors downstairs at each entrance.</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>The doors on the Murray and Forbes entrances are opened at the following hours:</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Monday through Thursday:  7 AM - 11PM</b></i><p>
<i><b>Friday:     7 AM - 2 AM (Sat)</b></i><p>
<i><b>Saturday:    10AM - 2 AM (Sun)</b></i><p>
<i><b>Sunday:    10AM - 11PM</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>We do not have a timer on our main door or back door. We ask that the first person to come in the main door please enter their pass code (the one you gave me) then the * (star key) on the key pad outside the door and this will unlock the door for the day. You will know that it is unlocked when you see the green light turn-on on the key pad. This will allow visitors to enter during working hours. We will lock the doors around 5:30PM. If you have a visitor coming later the door will be left unlocked. You will then be responsible for turning on the alarm system by entering the pass code and pressing “away” on the alarm pad and locking the door when you leave by entering your code and pressing the * (star key) on the key pad outside the door. The back door will remain locked at all times. You can use your swipe card or pass code to enter the door. The key pad controls only the door it is next to. </b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>You should need to use the swipe only on off hours. For example if you come in on the weekend, you will use your swipe and the door will remain locked after you have entered. </b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>When you have time, please test both your card and your code to make sure that both work properly.</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>If you have any questions, please ask me. Thanks!</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Sincerely,</b></i><p>
<p>
<i><b>Patricia Pesenti</b></i><p>
</BODY>
</HTML>
